Add a chapter about threading layer into the docs (#2848)
oneapi-src/oneDAL: docs/source/contribution/threading.rst

.. ******************************************************************************
.. * Copyright contributors to the oneDAL project
.. *
.. * Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
.. * you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.. * You may obtain a copy of the License at
.. *
.. *     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
.. *
.. * Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
.. * distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
.. * WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
.. * See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
.. * limitations under the License.
.. *******************************************************************************/

.. highlight:: cpp

Threading Layer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

oneDAL uses Intel\ |reg|\  oneAPI Threading Building Blocks (Intel\ |reg|\  oneTBB) to do parallel
computations on CPU.

But oneTBB is not used in the code of oneDAL algorithms directly. The algorithms rather

> use custom primitives that either wrap oneTBB functionality or are inhome developed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use custom primitives that either wrap oneTBB functionality or are developed in-house.
```

Those primitives form oneDAL's threading layer.

This is done in order not to be dependent on possible oneTBB API changes and even

> on the particular threading technology.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean POSIX vs non-POSIX threads when you mention the threading technology? It's worth giving a name of the type of threads that you mean.

The API of the layer is defined in
`threading.h <https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneDAL/blob/main/cpp/daal/src/threading/threading.h>`_.

> Please be aware that those APIs are not publicly defined. So they can be changed at any time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please be aware that those APIs are not publicly defined, so they can be changed at any time
```

> Please be aware that those APIs are not publicly defined, so they can be changed at any time

Reviewer 2: The API is public, as I can take the file without a licence and look at it. Maybe something like:

```
Please be aware that the threading API is not constrained by a specification. Work is ongoing to improve the threading layer, and in that time, the functions in the threading API may be changed without notice.
```

without any notification.

This chapter describes common parallel patterns and primitives of the threading layer.

threader_for
************

Lets consider you need to compute an elementwise sum of two arrays and store the results
into another array.
Here is a variant of sequential implementation:

.. include:: ../includes/threading/sum-sequential.rst

> There are several options available in oneDAL's threading layer to let the iterations of this code

Author: That is a new information for me. Thank you!
I had fixed all the mentions in this PR.

run in parallel.
One of the options is to use ``daal::threader_for`` as shown here:

.. include:: ../includes/threading/sum-parallel.rst

The iteration space here goes from ``0`` to ``n-1``.

> The last argument is the lambda function that defines a function object that proceeds ``i``-th

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The last argument is a function object that performs a single iteration of the loop, given loop index ``i``
```

I've not seen discussion around the independence of loop iterations. I think we are talking about data independent loops here, right? It would be good to state the assumed interaction between different loop iterations.

iteration of the loop.

Blocking
--------

To have more control over the parallel execution and to increase

> `cache locality <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locality_of_reference>`_ oneDAL usually splits

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`cache locality <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locality_of_reference>`, oneDAL usually splits
```

the data into blocks and then processes those blocks in parallel.

This code shows how a typical parallel loop in oneDAL looks like:

.. include:: ../includes/threading/sum-parallel-by-blocks.rst

Thread-local Storage (TLS)
**************************

Lets consider you need to compute a dot product of two arrays.
Here is a variant of sequential implementation:

.. include:: ../includes/threading/dot-sequential.rst

Parallel computations can be performed in two steps:

>     1. Compute partial dot product at each threaded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    1. Compute partial dot product in each thread.
```

>     2. Perform a reduction: Sum the partial results from all threads to compute the final dot product.

Author: Probably yes. Not sure as I am not a native speaker. Modified to "add the partial results".

``daal::tls`` provides a local storage where each thread can accumulate its local results.

> Following code allocates memory that would store partial dot products for each thread:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following code allocates memory that would store partial dot products for each thread:
```

.. include:: ../includes/threading/dot-parallel-init-tls.rst

``SafeStatus`` in this code denotes a thread-safe counterpart of the ``Status`` class.

> ``SafeStatus`` allows to collect errors from all threads and report them to user using
> ``detach()`` method as it will be shown later in the code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``SafeStatus`` allows to collect errors from all threads and report them to the user using the
``detach()`` method. An example will be shown later in the documentation.
```

Would be worth linking to the example of how to use the detach method

Checking the status right after the initialization code won't show the allocation errors,
because oneTBB uses lazy evaluation and the lambda function passed to the constructor of the TLS

> is evaluated in the moment of the TLS's first use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is evaluated on first use of the thread local storage (TLS).
```

> Again, there are several options available in the threading layer of oneDAL to compute the partial

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are several options available in the threading layer of oneDAL to compute the partial
```

dot product results at each thread.
One of the options is to use the already mentioned ``daal::threader_for`` and blocking approach
as shown here:

.. include:: ../includes/threading/dot-parallel-partial-compute.rst

> To compute the final result it is requred to reduce TLS's partial results over all threads

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To compute the final result it is required to reduce each thread's partial results
```

as shown here:

.. include:: ../includes/threading/dot-parallel-reduction.rst

> Local memory of the threads should also be released when it is no longer needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Local memory of the threads should be released when it is no longer needed.
```

> The complete parallel verision of dot product computations would look like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The complete parallel version of dot product computations would look like:
```

.. include:: ../includes/threading/dot-parallel.rst

Static Work Scheduling
**********************

By default, oneTBB uses
`dynamic work scheduling <https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneTBB/main/tbb_userguide/How_Task_Scheduler_Works.html>`_
and work stealing.
It means that two different runs of the same parallel loop can produce different
mappings of the loop's iteration space to the available threads.
This strategy is beneficial when it is difficult to estimate the amount of work performed
by each iteration.

> In the cases when it is known that the iterations perform an equal amount of work, it

Reviewer 2: In all cases, where you know how much work there is to do in the parallel regions, it will be faster to map the work onto threads using a dynamic schedule. Drop the use of `it might be beneficial to use ...` in favour of `it is more performant to use ...`

> might be benefitial to use predefined mapping of the loop's iterations to threads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
might be beneficial to use predefined mapping of the loop's iterations to threads.
```

This is what static work scheduling does.

> ``daal::static_threader_for`` and ``daal::static_tls`` allow to implement static
> work scheduling within oneDAL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``daal::static_threader_for`` and ``daal::static_tls`` allow implementation of
static work scheduling within oneDAL.
```

Here is a variant of parallel dot product computation with static scheduling:

.. include:: ../includes/threading/dot-static-parallel.rst

Nested parallelism
******************

> It is allowed to have nested parallel loops within oneDAL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OneDAL supports nested parallel loops.
```

> What is important to know is that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is important to know that:
```

    "when a parallel construct calls another parallel construct, a thread can obtain a task
     from the outer-level construct while waiting for completion of the inner-level one."

    -- `oneTBB documentation <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/onetbb/developer-guide-api-reference/2021-13/work-isolation.html>`_

> In practice, this means that a thread-local variable might unexpectedly

Reviewer 2: Can you define what you mean by thread-local? I usually think of thread local data to mean that only a single thread can read or write the value to thread-local storage. The thread-local storage class `tls` is intended to be used for thread local storage, but it cannot do so in the case of nested parallelism. The only thread local storage which is guaranteed to be thread local is in the leaf nodes of a graph of threads.

So something along the lines of:
```
If we define thread-local data to be data that can only be read and written by a single thread, then any thread which spawns other threads in general cannot have thread-local variables. This is true for variables which are defined as thread-local. This means that great care is required when using thread-local storage constructs in nested parallel regions to avoid issues caused by concurrent data access and ownership (e.g. data corruption due to races; segmentation faults; and deadlocks)
```

Author: By thread-local data I mean the data that is managed by a particular thread.
The issue here is that there is a difference between the threads and logical tasks (loop's iterations here).
One thread can be assigned to execute several iterations of the loop.

In case of nested loops the specifics of oneTBB is that when the thread executes an outer iteration `i` of a nested loop it becomes a so called waiting thread while it waits for a completion of the inner parallel loop. And then this waiting thread can be assigned to perform another iteration `j` of an outer loop.
So, it might first complete the iteration `j` of the outer loop which will change the state of thread-local values, and then return back to iteration `i` .

I tried to reflect this behavior in the documentation's text.

In general I do not agree that the thread that spawns other threads cannot have thread-local data. But I agree that thread-local data should be used with great care in those cases.

> In practice this means that, for example, a thread-local variable might unexpectedly

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In practice, this means that a thread-local variable might unexpectedly
```

change its value after a nested parallel construct:

.. include:: ../includes/threading/nested-parallel.rst

In some scenarios this can lead to deadlocks, segmentation faults and other issues.

oneTBB provides ways to isolate execution of a parallel construct, for its tasks
to not interfere with other simultaneously running tasks.

Those options are preferred when the parallel loops are initially written as nested.
But in oneDAL there are cases when one parallel algorithm, the outer one,
calls another parallel algorithm, the inner one, within a parallel region.

The inner algorithm in this case can also be called solely, without additional nesting.

> And we do not want to always make it isolated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And we do not always want to make it isolated.
```

> For the cases like that oneDAL provides ``daal::ls``. Its ``local()`` method always

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the cases like that, oneDAL provides ``daal::ls``. Its ``local()`` method always
```
